The second book of Moses, called Exodus
Now these are the names of the children of Israel which came into Egypt, every man and
his household came with Jacob. Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob
were seventy souls, for Joseph was in Egypt already. And Joseph died, and all his brethren,
and all that generation. And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly,
and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them. Now there
arose up a new king over Egypt which knew not Joseph. And he said unto his people, Behold
the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we. Come on, let us deal
wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass that when there falleth out
any war they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of
the land. Therefore they did set over them task-masters to afflict them with their burdens,
and they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pitham, and Ramses. But the more they afflicted
them the more they multiplied, and grew, and they were grieved because of the children
of Israel. And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigor, and they made
their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service
in the field. All their service wherein they made them serve was with rigor. And the king
of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shifra, and
the name of the other Pua. And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew
women, and see them upon the stools, if it be a son, then ye shall kill him, but if it
be a daughter, then she shall live. But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king
of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men-children alive. And the king of Egypt called for the
midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men-children
alive? And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian
women, for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them. Therefore
God dealt well with the midwives, and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.
And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses. And
Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river,
and every daughter ye shall save alive.
And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi. And the
woman conceived, and bare a son. And when she saw him, that he was a goodly child, she
hid him three months. And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of
bulrushes, and daubed it with slime, and with pitch, and put the child therein, and she
laid it in the flags by the river's bank. And his sister stood afar off to wit what
would be done to him. And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river,
and her maidens walked along by the river's side, and when she saw the ark among the flags
she sent her maid to fetch it. And when she had opened it she saw the child, and behold
the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.
Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go, and call to thee a nurse of the
Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee? And Pharaoh's daughter said to her,
Go. And the maid went, and called the child's mother. And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her,
Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman
took the child, and nursed it. And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter,
and he became her son. And she called his name Moses, and she said, Because I drew him
out of the water. And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out
and looked on their burdens, and he spied an Egyptian smiting in Hebrew one of his brethren.
And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew the
Egyptian and hid him in the sand. And when he went out the second day, behold two men
of the Hebrews strove together, and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest
thou thy fellow? And he said, Whom made thee a prince and a judge over us? Intendest thou
to kill me, as thou killest the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing
is known. Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses, but Moses fled from
the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian, and he sat down by a well. Now
the priest of Midian had seven daughters, and they came and drew water, and filled the
troughs to water their father's flock. And the shepherds came and drove them away, but
Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock. And when they came to rule their
father, he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to-day? And they said, An Egyptian
delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered
their flock. And he said unto his daughters, And where is he? Why is it that ye have left
the man? Call him, that he may eat bread. And Moses was content to dwell with the man,
and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter. And she bare him a son, and he called his name
Gershom, for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land. And it came to pass in
the process of time that the king of Egypt died, and the children of Israel sighed by
reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the
bondage. And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham,
with Isaac, and with Jacob. And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect
unto them.
Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, the priest of Midian, and he led the flock
to the back side of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb. And the
angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush, and he
looked, and behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. And Moses said,
I will now turn aside and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt. And when the Lord
saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and
said, Moses, Moses! And he said, Here am I! And he said, Draw not nigh hither, put off
thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place where I'll now standest is holy ground. Moreover,
he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob. And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God.
And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt,
and have heard their cry by reason of their task-masters, for I know their sorrows, and
I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land, unto a good land, at a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey, unto
the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and
the Hivites, and the Jebusites. Now therefore behold the cry of the children of Israel is
come unto me, and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppressed them. Come
now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people,
the children of Israel, out of Egypt.
And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should
bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? And he said, Certainly I will be with
thee, and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee. When thou hast brought
forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.
And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say
unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you, and they shall say to me, What
is his name? What shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I am that I am. And
he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I am, hath sent me unto you.
And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The
Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath
sent me unto you. This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.
Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The Lord God of your fathers,
the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited
you and seen that which has done to you in Egypt. And I have said, I will bring you up
out of the affliction of Egypt, unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the
Samarites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with
milk and honey. And they shall hearken to thy voice, and thou shalt come, thou and the
elders of Israel, unto the King of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The Lord God of
the Hebrews hath met with us. And now let us go, we beseech thee, three days journey
into the wilderness, though it may sacrifice to the Lord our God.
And I am sure that the King of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.
And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do
in the midst thereof, and after that he will let you go. And I will give this people favor
in the sight of the Egyptians, and it shall come to pass that when ye go ye shall not
go empty. But every woman shall borrow of her neighbor, and of her that sojourneth in
her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and ye shall put them upon
your sons and upon your daughters, and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.
And Moses answered and said, But behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice,
for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee. And the Lord said unto him, What
is that in thine hand? And he said, A rod. And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he
cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent, and Moses fled from before it. And the Lord
said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his
hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand. That they may believe that the Lord
God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob hath
appeared unto thee. And the Lord said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom.
And he put his hand into his bosom. And when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous
as snow. And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into
his bosom again, and plucked it out of his bosom, and behold, it was turned again as
his other flesh. And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken
to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.
And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken
unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the
dry land, and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the
dry land. And Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither hew to
for, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant, but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.
And the Lord said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth, or who maketh the dumb, or deaf,
or the seeing, or the blind? Have not I the Lord? Now therefore go, and I will be with
thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say. And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray,
thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well,
and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee, and when he seeth thee, he will be glad
in his heart. And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth, and I will be
with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do. And he shall be
thy spokesman unto the people, and he shall be, even he shall be to thee, instead of a
mouth, and thou shalt be to him, instead of God. And thou shalt take this rod in thine
hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs.
And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law, and said unto him, Let me go,
I pray thee, and return unto my brethren, which are in Egypt, and see whether they be
yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace. And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian,
Go, return into Egypt, for all the men are dead which sought thy life. And Moses took
his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt,
and Moses took the rod of God in his hand. And the Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest
to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh which I have put
in thine hand. But I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go. And
thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my son, even my firstborn.
And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me. And if thou refuse to let him
go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn.
And it came to pass, by the way, in the inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill
him. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast
it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me. So he let him go,
then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision.
And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in
the mount of God, and kissed him. And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord who had
sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him. And Moses and Aaron went, and gathered
together all the elders of the children of Israel. And Aaron spake all the words which
the Lord had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs and the sight of the people. And the
people believed, that when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel,
and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads, and worshipped.
And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel,
Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.
And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not
the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.
And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us. Let us go, we pray thee, three
days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the Lord our God, lest he fall upon us
with pestilence or with the sword.
And the King of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from
their works? Get you unto your burdens.
And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and ye make them rest from
their burdens.
And Pharaoh commanded the same day the task-masters of the people and their officers, saying,
Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore. Let them go and
gather straw for themselves. And the tail of the bricks, which they did make heretofore,
ye shall lay upon them. Ye shall not diminish aught thereof, for they be idle. Therefore
they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.
Let their more work be laid upon the men that they may labor therein, and let them not regard
vain words.
And the task-masters of the people went out and their officers, and they spake to the
people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw. Go ye, get you straw,
where you can find it. Yet not aught of your work shall be diminished.
So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble instead
of straw. And the task-masters hasted them, saying, Fulfill your works, your daily tasks,
as when there was straw. And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh's
task-masters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled
your task in making brick, both yesterday and to-day, as heretofore?
Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore
dealest thou thus with thy servants? There is no straw given unto thy servants, and
they say to us, Make brick, and behold, thy servants are beaten, but the fault is in thine
own people.
But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to the
Lord. Go therefore now and work, for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye
deliver the tale of bricks.
And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in evil case, after
it was said, Ye shall not diminish aught from your bricks of your daily task.
And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh.
And they said unto them, The Lord look upon you and judge, because ye have made our savor
to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword
in their hand to slay us.
And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Lord, wherefore hast thou so evil and treated
this people? Why is it that thou hast sent me? For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in
thy name, he hath done evil to this people, neither hast thou delivered thy people at
all.
Then the Lord said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh, for with a
strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his
land.
And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord. And I appeared unto Abraham,
unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I
not known to them. And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land
of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers. And I have also heard
the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I have
remembered my covenant. Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and
I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of
their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments,
and I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God, and ye shall know
that I am the Lord your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
And I will bring you in unto the land concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham,
to Isaac, and to Jacob, and I will give it you for an heritage. I am the Lord.
And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel, but they hearken not unto Moses for anguish
of spirit, and for cruel bondage. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Go in, speak
unto Pharaoh, King of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land. And
Moses spake before the Lord, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened
unto me. How then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips? And the Lord spake
unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and
unto Pharaoh, King of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
These be the heads of their fathers' houses, the sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel,
Hanukkah, and Palu, Hezran, and Carmi. These be the families of Reuben. And the sons of
Simeon, Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jaqen, and Zohar, and Sheul, the son of a Canaanitish
woman. These are the families of Simeon. And these are the names of the sons of Levi according
to their generations, Gershon, and Kohath, and Mirari. And the years of the life of Levi
were 130 and 7 years. The sons of Gershon, Libni, and Shimei, according to their families.
And the sons of Kohath, Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uziol. And the years of the
life of Kohath were 130 and 3 years. And the sons of Mirari, Mehalai, and Mushai. These
are the families of Levi according to their generations. And Amram took Jacobed, his father's
sister, to wife, and she bared him Aaron and Moses. And the years of the life of Amram
were 130 and 7 years. And the sons of Izhar, Korah, and Nefeg, and Zikrai. And the sons
of Uziol, Maishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithrai. And Aaron took him Elishaba, daughter of
Minadab, sister of Neishan, to wife. And she bared him Nadab, and Abihu, Eliezer, and Ithamar.
And the sons of Korah, Aser, and Alkena, and Abiasif. These are the families of the Korheites.
And Eliezer, Aaron's son, took him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife. And she bared
him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
These are that Aaron and Moses to whom the Lord said, Bring out the children of Israel
from the land of Egypt according to their armies. These are they which spake to Pharaoh,
King of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt. These are that Moses and
Aaron. And it came to pass on the day when the Lord spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt
that the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I am the Lord, speak thou unto Pharaoh, King
of Egypt, all that I say unto thee. And Moses said before the Lord, Behold, I am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?
And the LORD said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet. Thou shalt speak all that I command thee, and Aaron thy brother
shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his land. And I
will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.
But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth
mine armies, and my people, the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt, by great
judgments. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch forth mine hand
upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them. And Moses and Aaron
did as the LORD commanded them, so did they. And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron
fourscore and three years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh. And the LORD spake unto Moses
and unto Aaron, saying, When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Show a miracle for
you, then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it
will become a serpent. And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the
LORD had commanded, and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh and before his servants,
and it became a serpent. Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers. Now
the magicians of Egypt they also did in like manner with their enchantments. For they cast
down every man his rod, and they became serpents, but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods. And
he hardened Pharaoh's heart that he hearkened not unto them as the LORD had said. And the
LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened, he refuseth to let the people go. Get thee
unto Pharaoh in the morning, lo, he goeth out unto the water, and thou shalt stand by the
serpent, shalt thou take in thine hand. And thou shalt say unto him, The LORD, God of
the Hebrews, hath sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in
the wilderness, and behold, hitherto thou wouldest not here. Thus saith the LORD, In
this thou shalt know that I am the LORD. Behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine
hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood. And the
fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall stink, and the Egyptians shall
loathe to drink of the water of the river. And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron,
Take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon
their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of water, that they may become
blood, and that there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of
wood and in vessels of stone. And Moses and Aaron did so as the LORD commanded, and he
lifted up the rod and smote the waters that were in the river in the sight of Pharaoh
and in the sight of his servants, and all the waters that were in the river were turned
to blood. And the fish that was in the river died, and the river stank, and the Egyptians
could not drink of the water of the river, and there was blood throughout all the land
of Egypt. And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments, and Pharaoh's heart
was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them, as the LORD had said. And Pharaoh turned
and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also. And all the Egyptians
digged round about the river for water to drink, for they could not drink of the water
of the river. And seven days were fulfilled after that the LORD had smitten the river.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh,
and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me. And
if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs, and the
river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house
and into thy bed-chamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon
thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneading-troughs. And the frogs shall
come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over
the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the
land of Egypt. And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs
came up, and covered the land of Egypt. And the magicians did so with their enchantments,
and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and
said, Entreat the LORD, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people, and
I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the LORD.
And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me! when shall I entreat for thee, and for thy
servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, that they
may remain in the river only? And he said, To-morrow. And he said, Be it according to
thy word, that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the LORD our God. And the
frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy
people, they shall remain in the river only. And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh,
and Moses cried unto the LORD because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.
And the LORD did according to the word of Moses, and the frogs died out of the houses,
out of the villages, and out of the fields. And they gathered them together upon heaps,
and the land stank. But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart,
and hearkened not unto them, as the LORD had said. And the LORD said unto Moses, Say unto
Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice
throughout all the land of Egypt. And they did so, for Aaron stretched out his hand with
his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast, all
the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt. And the magicians did
so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not, so there were lice
upon man and upon beast. Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God.
And Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them, as the LORD had said.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh,
lo he cometh forth to the water, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go,
that they may serve me. Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send
swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses,
and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon
they are. And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell,
that no swarms of flies shall be there, to the end thou mayest know that I am the LORD
in the midst of the earth. And I will put a division between my people and thy people,
to-morrow shall this sign be. And the LORD did so, and there came a grievous swarm of
flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all the land
of Egypt, the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies. And Pharaoh called
Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land. And Moses said, It is not
meet so to do, for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our
God. Lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will
they not stone us? We will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice
to the LORD our God, as he shall command us. And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that
ye may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness, only ye shall not go very far
away. Entreat for me. And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will entreat the
LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people
tomorrow. But let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice
to the LORD. And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and entreated the LORD. And the LORD did according
to the word of Moses, and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants,
and from his people. There remained not one. And Pharaoh heartened his heart at this time
also. Neither would he let the people go.
Then the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith the LORD,
God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me. For if thou refuse to let
them go, and wilt hold them still, behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy cattle which
is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and
upon the sheep, there shall be a very grievous moraine. And the LORD shall sever between
the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt, and there shall nothing die of all that is
the childrens of Israel. And the LORD appointed a set time, saying, Tomorrow the LORD shall
do this thing in the land. And the LORD did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle
of Egypt died, but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one. And Pharaoh sent,
and behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh
was hardened, and he did not let the people go.
And the LORD said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace,
and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh. And it shall become
small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon
man and upon beast throughout all the land of Egypt. And they took ashes of the furnace
and stood before Pharaoh, and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven, and it became a boil
breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast. And the magicians could not stand before
Moses because of the boils, for the boil was upon the magicians and upon all the Egyptians.
And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he harkened not unto them as the LORD
had spoken unto Moses. And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early
in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God
of the Hebrews, Let my people go that they may serve me. For I will at this time send
all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, that thou
mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth. For now I will stretch out
my hand that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence, and thou shalt be cut off
from the earth. And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in
thee my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth. As yet exaltest
thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go? Behold, to-morrow, about
this time, I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt
since the foundation thereof even until now.
Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field, for upon
every man and beast which shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home,
the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die. He that feared the word of the
LORD among the servants of Pharaoh, made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses.
And he that regarded not the word of the LORD left his servants and his cattle in the field.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward heaven, that there may be
hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field
throughout the land of Egypt. And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven, and the LORD
sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground, and the LORD rained hail
upon the land of Egypt. So there was hail and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous,
such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. And
the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man
and beast. And the hail smote every herb of the field, and break every tree of the field.
Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.
And Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this time,
the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. Entreat the LORD, for it is enough
that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail, and I will let you go, and ye shall
no longer. And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread
abroad my hands unto the LORD, and the thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more
hail, that thou mayest know how that the earth is the LORD's. But as for thee and thy servants,
I know that ye will not yet fear the LORD God. And the flax and the barley was smitten,
for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was bald. But the wheat and the rye were not
smitten, for they were not grown up. And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh,
and spread abroad his hands unto the LORD, and the thunders and hails ceased, and the
rain was not poured upon the earth. And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and
the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.
And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go,
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart,
and the heart of his servants, that I might show these my signs before him, and that thou
mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought in Egypt,
and my signs which I have done among them, that ye may know how that I am the LORD.
And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the
Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? Let my people go, that they
may serve me. Else if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to-morrow will I bring the
locusts into thy coast, and they shall cover the face of the earth that one cannot be able to see
the earth, and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from
the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field. And they shall fill
thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians, which neither
thy fathers nor thy fathers' fathers have seen since the day that they were upon the earth,
unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh. And Pharaoh's servants said unto
him, How long shall this man be a snare unto us? Let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their
God. Knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed? And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh,
and he said unto them, Go, serve the LORD your God. But who are they that shall go?
And Moses said, We will go with our young, and with our old, with our sons, and with our daughters,
with our flocks, and with our herds will we go. For we must hold a feast unto the LORD.
And he said unto them, Let the LORD be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones.
Look to it, for evil is before you. Not so. Go now ye that are men, and serve the LORD.
For that ye did desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts,
that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the
hail hath left. And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an
east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night. And when it was morning the east wind
brought the locusts. And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested on all the
coasts of Egypt. Very grievous were they. Before them there were no such locusts as they. Neither
after them shall be such. For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was
darkened. And they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had
left. And there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field,
through all the land of Egypt. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste, and he said,
I have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you. Now therefore forgive, I pray thee,
only this once, and entreat the LORD your God, that he may take away from me this death only.
And he went out from Pharaoh, and entreated the LORD. And the LORD turned a mighty strong west
wind, which took away the locusts, and cast them into the Red Sea. There remained not one locust
in all the coasts of Egypt. But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the
children of Israel go. And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven,
that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt. And Moses
stretched forth his hand toward heaven, and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three
days. They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place, for three days. But all the children
of Israel had light in their dwellings. And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye,
serve the LORD, only let your flocks and your herds be stayed, let your little ones also go with you.
And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice unto
the LORD our God. Our cattle also shall go with us, there shall not an hoof be left behind,
for thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God. And we know not with what we must serve the
LORD until we come thither. But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go.
And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed thyself, see my face no more,
for in that day thou seest my face, thou shalt die. And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well,
I will see thy face again no more.
And the LORD said unto Moses,
Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh and upon Egypt. Afterwards he will let you go hence.
When he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.
Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbor,
and every woman of her neighbor, jewels of silver and jewels of gold.
And the LORD gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very
great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.
And Moses said, Thus saith the LORD, About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt,
and all the first born in the land of Egypt shall die, from the first born of Pharaoh that
sitteth upon his throne, even unto the first born of the maid-servant that is behind the mill,
and all the first born of beasts. And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt,
such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more. But against any of the children of
Israel shall not a dog move his tongue against man or beast, that ye may know how that the LORD
doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel. And all these thy servants shall come down
unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people that follow thee,
and after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that my wonders may be multiplied
in the land of Egypt. And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh, and the LORD
hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out of his hand.
And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying, This month shall
be unto you the beginning of months, it shall be the first month of the year to you.
Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they
shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for
an house.
And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto
his house take it according to the number of the souls, every man according to his eating
shall make your account for the lamb.
Your lamb shall be without blemish a male of the first year, ye shall take it out from
the sheep or from the goats, and ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the
same month, and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the
evening.
And they shall take up the blood and strike it on the two side-posts and on the upper
door-post of the houses wherein they shall eat it.
And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire and unleavened bread, and
with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
Eat not of it raw nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire, his head with his legs
and with the pertenance thereof.
And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning, and that which remaineth of it
until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
And thus shall ye eat it, with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your
staff in your hand, and ye shall eat it in haste, it is the Lord's Passover.
For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the first born
in the land of Egypt, both man and beast, and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute
judgment.
I am the Lord.
And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are, and when I see
the blood I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you when
I smite the land of Egypt.
And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout
your generations, ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.
Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread, even the first day ye shall put away leaven
out of your houses, for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh
day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there
shall be an holy convocation to you.
No matter of work shall be done in them save that which every man must eat, that only may
be done of you.
And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread, for in this selfsame day have I brought
your armies out of the land of Egypt, therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations
by an ordinance for ever.
In the first month on the fourteenth day of the month at even ye shall eat unleavened
bread until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.
Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses, for whosoever eateth that
which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether
he be a stranger or born in the land.
Ye shall eat nothing leavened, and all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.
Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel and said unto them, Draw out and take you
a lamb according to your families and kill the Passover.
And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop and dip it in the blood that is in the basin and strike
the lintel and the two side-posts with the blood that is in the basin, and none of you
shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.
For the Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians, and when he seeth the blood upon
the lintel and on the two side-posts the Lord will pass over the door and will not suffer
the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.
And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.
And it shall come to pass when ye become to the land which the Lord will give you according
as he hath promised that ye shall keep this service.
And it shall come to pass when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service,
that ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover who passed over the houses
of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses.
And the people bowed the head and worshipped.
And the children of Israel went away and did as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron,
so did they.
And it came to pass that at midnight the Lord smote all the first born in the land of Egypt
from the first born of Pharaoh that sat on his throne under the first born of the captive
that was in the dungeon and all the first born of cattle.
And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his servants and all the Egyptians, and there
was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house where there was not one dead.
And he called for Moses and Aaron by night and said, Rise up and get you forth from among
my people, both ye and the children of Israel, and go, serve the Lord, as ye have said.
Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone, and bless me also.
And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people that they might send them out of the land
in haste, for they said, We be all dead men.
And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading troughs being
bound up and their clothes upon their shoulders. And the children of Israel did according to
the word of Moses, and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver and jewels of gold
and raiment. And the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that
they lent unto them such things as they required, and they spoiled the Egyptians.
And the children of Israel journeyed from Ramesses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand
on foot that were men, beside children. And a mixed multitude went up also with them,
and flocks and herds, even very much cattle. And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough
which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened, because they were thrust
out of Egypt and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual.
Now the sojourning of the children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt was four hundred and thirty
years. And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame
day had came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt.
It is a night to be much observed unto the Lord for bringing them out from the land of
Egypt. This is that night of the Lord to be observed of all the children of Israel in
their generations.
And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the Passover. There shall
no stranger eat thereof, but every man's servant that has bought for money, when thou hast
circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof. A foreigner and an hired servant shall not
eat thereof. In one house shall it be eaten, thou shalt not carry forth aught of the flesh
abroad out of the house, neither shall ye break a bone thereof. All the congregation
of Israel shall keep it. And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
Passover to the Lord, let all his meals be circumcised, and then let him come near and
keep it, and he shall be as one that is born in the land, for no uncircumcised person shall
eat thereof. One law shall be to him that is home-born, and unto the stranger that sojourneth
among you.
Thus did all the children of Israel, as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
And it came to pass the selfsame day that the Lord did bring the children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt by their armies.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Sanctify unto me all the first born, whatsoever openeth
the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast, it is mine. And Moses
said unto the people, Remember this day in which ye came out from Egypt out of the house
of bondage, for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out from this place, there shall
no leavened bread be eaten.
This day came ye out in the month Abib.
And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and
the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he swear unto thy
fathers to give thee a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service
in this month.
Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to
the Lord.
Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days, and there shall no leavened bread be seen
with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.
And thou shalt show thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord
did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.
And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine
eyes, that the Lord's law may be in thy mouth, for with a strong hand hath the Lord brought
thee out of Egypt.
Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year.
And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he
shalt set apart unto the Lord all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh
of a beast which thou hast, the males shall be the Lord's.
And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb, and if thou wilt not redeem it,
then thou shalt break his neck, and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt
thou redeem.
And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this?
that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt from
the house of bondage.
And it came to pass when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the firstborn
in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man and the firstborn of beast.
Therefore I sacrificed to the Lord all that openeth the matrix, being males, but all the
firstborn of my children I redeem.
And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes, for
by strength of hand the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt.
And it came to pass when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the
way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near, for God said, Lest per adventure
the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt.
But God led the people about through the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea, and the
children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.
And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had straightly sworn the children of
Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones away hence
with you.
And they took their journey from Succoth and encamped in ethom in the edge of the wilderness.
And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the way, and
by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, to go by day and night.
He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from
before the people.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel that they turn
and encamp forphi-hyrath between Migdal and the sea over against Baal-Ziphon.
Before it shall ye encamp by the sea.
For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness
hath shut them in.
And I will harden Pharaoh's heart that he shall follow after them, and I will be honored
upon Pharaoh and upon all his host that the Egyptians may know that I am the Lord.
And they did so.
And it was told the King of Egypt that the people fled, and the heart of Pharaoh and
of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that
we have let Israel go from serving us?
And he made ready his chariot and took his people with him, and he took six hundred chosen
chariots and all the chariots of Egypt and captains over every one of them.
And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, King of Egypt, and he pursued after the children
of Israel, and the children of Israel went out with a high hand.
But the Egyptians pursued after them all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh and his horsemen
and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea beside Piah-hyrath before Baal-Ziphon.
And when Pharaoh drew nigh the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold the
Egyptians marched after them, and they were sore afraid, and the children of Israel cried
out unto the Lord.
And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away
to die in the wilderness?
Wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us to carry us forth out of Egypt?
Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone that we may
for it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians than that we should die in the wilderness?
And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the
Lord which he will show to you to-day, for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to-day ye
shall see them again no more for ever.
The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore cryest thou unto me, Speak unto the children of
Israel that they go forward, but lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over
the sea, and divide it, and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the
midst of the sea.
And I, behold I, will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them,
and I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and
upon his horsemen.
And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I have gotten me honor upon Pharaoh,
upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
And the angel of God which went before the camp of Israel removed and went behind them,
and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face and stood behind them.
And it came between the cap of the Egyptians and the cap of Israel, and it was a cloud
in darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these, so that the one came not near
the other all the night.
And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the Lord caused the sea to go back
by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were
divided.
And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground, and the waters
were a wall unto them on their right hand and on their left.
And the Egyptians pursued and went in after them to the midst of the sea, even all Pharaoh's
horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.
And it came to pass that in the morning watch the Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians
through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians, and
took off their chariot wheels that they draved them heavily, so that the Egyptians said,
Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fighteth for them against the Egyptians.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may
come again upon the Egyptians, and upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength
when the morning appeared, and the Egyptians fled against it, and the Lord overthrew the
Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
And the waters returned and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh
that came into the sea after them, there remained not so much as one of them.
But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea, and the waters
were a wall unto them on their right hand and on their left.
Thus the Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw
the Egyptians dead upon the seashore.
And Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians, and the people feared
the Lord and believed the Lord and His servant Moses.
Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spake, saying,
I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously.
The horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
The Lord is my strength and song, and he has become my salvation.
He is my God, and I will prepare him and habitation, my Father's God, and I will exalt him.
The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name.
Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea.
His chosen captains also are drowned in the Red Sea.
The depths have covered them.
They sank into the bottom as a stone.
Thy right hand, O Lord, has become glorious in power.
Thy right hand, O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.
And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against
thee.
Thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble.
And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright
as a heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.
The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be
satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters.
Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods?
Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
Thou stretchest out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed, thou hast guided
them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.
The people shall hear and be afraid, sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestine.
Then the Dukes of Edom shall be amazed, the mighty men of Moab trembling shall take hold
upon them, all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.
Fear and dread shall fall upon them, by the greatness of thine arm they shall be as still
as a stone, till thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over which thou hast
purchased.
Thou shalt bring them in and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the
place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the sanctuary, O Lord, which
thy hands have established.
The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.
For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the
Lord brought again the waters of the sea upon them, but the children of Israel went on dry
land in the midst of the sea.
And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women
went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously, the horse
and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
So Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur,
and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.
And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were
bitter, therefore the name of it was called Marah.
And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
And he cried unto the Lord, and the Lord showed him a tree, which, when he had cast into the
waters, the waters were made sweet.
There he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them, and said, If thou
wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that which is right
in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none
of these diseases upon thee which I have brought upon the Egyptians, for I am the Lord that
healeth thee.
And they came to Elam, where were twelve wells of water, and threescore and ten palm-trees,
and they encamped there by the waters.
And they took their journey from Elam, and all the congregation of the children of Israel
came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elam and Sinai, on the fifteenth day
after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron
in the wilderness, and the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by
the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt when we sat by the flesh-pots and when we
did eat bread to the full, for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness to kill this
whole assembly with hunger.
Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you, and the people
shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them whether they will
walk in my law or no.
And it shall come to pass that on the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring
in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that
the Lord hath brought you out from the land of Egypt, and in the morning then ye shall
see the glory of the Lord, for that he heareth your murmurings against the Lord, and what
are we that ye murmur against us?
And Moses said, This shall be when the Lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat,
and in the morning bread to the full, for that the Lord heareth your murmurings which
ye murmur against him, and what are we, your murmurings are not against us, but against
the Lord.
And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, Come
near before the Lord, for he hath heard your murmurings.
And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel,
that they looked toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of the Lord appeared in
the cloud.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel,
speak unto them, saying, At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be
filled with bread, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God.
And it came to pass that at even the quails came up and covered the camp, and in the morning
the dew lay round about the host.
And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay
a small round thing, as small as the whore-frost on the ground.
And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It is manna, for they
whisked not what it was.
And Moses said unto them, This is the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat.
This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded.
Gather of it every man according to his eating, and omer for every man according to the number
of your persons.
Take ye every man for them which are in his tents.
And the children of Israel did so, and gathered some more, some less.
And when they did meet it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he
that gathered little had no lack.
They gathered every man according to his eating.
And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses, but some of them left of it until the morning,
and it bred worms and stank, and Moses was wroth with them.
And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating, and when the
sun waxed hot it melted.
And it came to pass that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers
for one man, and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
And he said unto them, This is that which the Lord hath said, To-morrow is the rest
of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord.
Bake that which ye will bake to-day, and seed that which ye will seed, and that which remaineth
over, lay up for you to be kept until the morning.
And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bad, and it did not stink, neither was there
any worm therein.
And Moses said, Eat that to-day, for to-day is a Sabbath unto the Lord, to-day ye shall
not find it in the field.
Six days shall ye gather it, but on the seventh day, which is the Sabbath, in it there shall
be none.
And it came to pass that there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather,
and they found none.
And the Lord said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?
See for that the Lord hath given you the Sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day
the bread of two days, Abigee, every man in his place, let no man go out of his place
on the seventh day.
So the people rested on the seventh day.
And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna, and it was like coriander seed, white,
and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.
And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commandeth, fill an omer of it to be
kept for your generations, that they may seed the bread wherewith I have fed you in the
wilderness when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot and put an omer full of Manna therein, and lay
it up before the Lord to be kept for your generations.
As the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the testimony to be kept.
And the children of Israel did eat Manna forty years until they came to a land inhabited.
They did eat Manna until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.
Now an omer is the tenth part of an ifah.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin
after their journeys according to the commandment of the LORD, and pitched in Rephidim, and
there was no water for the people to drink. Wherefore the people did chide with Moses,
and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with
me? Wherefore do ye tempt the LORD? And the people thirsted there for water, and the people
murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of
Egypt to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst? And Moses cried unto
the LORD, saying, What shall I do unto this people? They be almost ready to stone me.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders
of Israel, and thy rod wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go. Behold,
I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb, and thou shalt smite the rock, and
there shall come water out of it that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the
sight of the elders of Israel. And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah because
of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the LORD, saying,
Is the LORD among us or not? Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim. And Moses
said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek. To-morrow I will
stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand. So Joshua did as Moses
had said to him and fought with Amalek, and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of
the hill. And it came to pass when Moses held up his hand that Israel prevailed, and when
he let down his hand Amalek prevailed. But Moses' hands were heavy, and they took a stone
and put it under him, and he sat thereon, and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the
one on the one side and the other on the other side, and his hands were steady until the
going down of the sun. And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the
sword. And the LORD said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial and a book, and rehearse
it in the years of Joshua, for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under
heaven. And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovah-Nissai, for he said,
Because the LORD hath sworn that the LORD will have war with Amalek from generation
to generation.
When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard of all that God had done
for Moses and for Israel his people, and that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt,
then Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her back, and
her two sons, of which the name of the one was Gershom, for he said, I have been an alien
in a strange land. And the name of the other was Eleazar, for the God of my father, said
he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.
And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the
wilderness where he encamped to the mount of God. And he said unto Moses, I, thy father-in-law
Jethro, am come unto thee and thy wife and her two sons with her. And Moses went out
to meet his father-in-law, and did obeisance, and kissed him, and they asked each other
of their welfare, and they came into the tent. And Moses told his father-in-law all that
the Lord had done unto Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians, for Israel's sake, and all the
travails that had come upon them by the way, and how the Lord delivered them. And Jethro
rejoiced for all the goodness which the Lord had done to Israel, whom he had delivered
out of the hand of the Egyptians. And Jethro said, Blessed be the Lord who hath delivered
you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered
the people from under the hand of the Egyptians. Now I know that the Lord is greater than
all gods, for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them. And Jethro, Moses's
father-in-law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God, and Aaron came and all the elders
of Israel to eat bread with Moses's father-in-law before God. And it came to pass on the morrow
sat to judge the people, and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.
And when Moses's father-in-law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this
thing that thou doest to the people? Why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand
by thee from morning unto even? And Moses said unto his father-in-law, Because the people
come unto me to inquire of God. When they have a matter, they come unto me, and I judge
between one and another, and I do make them know the statutes of God and his laws. And
Moses's father-in-law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good. Thou wilt surely
wear away both thou and this people that is with thee, for this thing is too heavy for
thee. Thou art not able to perform it thyself alone. Harken thou unto my voice, I will
give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee. Be thou for the people to Godward, that thou
mayest bring the causes unto God, and thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and
shalt show them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do. Moreover
thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth,
hating covetousness, and place such over them to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds,
rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens, and let them judge the people at all seasons,
and it shall be that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter
they shall judge, so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with
thee. If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shalt be able
to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.
So Moses harken to the voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he had said. And Moses chose
the able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands,
rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens, and they judged the people
at all seasons, the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged
themselves. Then Moses let his father-in-law depart, and he went his way into his own land.
In the third month, when the children of Israel
were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness
of Sinai. For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, and
had pitched in the wilderness, and there Israel camped before the mount. And Moses went up
unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say
unto the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel. Ye have seen what I did unto the
Egyptians, and how I bear you on eagle's wings, and brought you unto myself. Now therefore,
if ye will obey my voice and deed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure
unto me above all people, for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom
of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the
children of Israel. And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid before
their faces all these words which the Lord commanded him. And all the people answered
together and said, All that the Lord hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the
words of the people unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee
in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee forever.
And Moses told the words of the people unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go
unto the people, and sanctify them to-day and to-morrow, and let them wash their clothes,
and be ready against the third day, for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight
of all the people upon Mount Sinai. And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about,
saying, Take heed to yourselves that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border
of it. Whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death. There shall not in
hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned or shot through. Whether it be beast or man,
it shall not live. When the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.
And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people, and they
washed their clothes. And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day, come
not at your wives. And it came to pass on the third day and the morning that there were
thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet
exceeding loud, so that all the people that was in the camp trembled. And Moses brought
forth the people out of the camp to meet with God, and they stood at the nether part of
the mount. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon
it in fire, and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount
quaked greatly. And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long and waxed louder and
louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice. And the Lord came down upon Mount
Sinai on the top of the mount, and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount, and
Moses went up. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break
through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish. And let the priests also, which
come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them. And Moses
said unto the Lord, The people cannot come up to Mount Sinai, for thou chargeth thus,
set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it. And the Lord said unto him, Away, get thee
down, and thou shalt come up, thou and Aaron with thee, but let not the priests and the
people break through to come up unto the Lord, lest he break forth upon them. So Moses went
down unto the people, and spake unto them.
And God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods
before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything
that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under
the earth. Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them. For I, the Lord thy
God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them
that love me, and keep my commandments. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy
work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt not do
any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day. Wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord
thy God giveth thee. Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt
not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor, thou shalt not covet
thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor
his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbor's.
And all the people saw the thunderings and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet
and the mountains spoking, and when the people saw it they removed and stood afar off. And
they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear, but let not God speak with
us lest we die. And Moses said unto the people, Fear not, for God has come to prove you, and
that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not. And the people stood afar off,
and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have
seen that I have talked with you from heaven. Ye shall not make with me gods of silver,
neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold. An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me,
and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine
oxen. In all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone, for
if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it. Neither shalt thou go up by steps
unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.
Now these are the judgments which thou shalt
set before them. If thou buy in Hebrew servant six years he shall serve, and in the seventh
he shall go out free for nothing. If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself.
If he were married, then his wife shall go out with him. If his master have given him
a wife, and she have borne him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall be her masters,
and he shall go out by himself. And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master,
my wife, and my children, I will not go out free, then his master shall bring him unto
the judges, he shall also bring him to the door or unto the door-post, and his master
shall bore his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him for ever.
And if a man sell his daughter to be a maid-servant, she shall not go out as the men-servants do.
If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed,
to sell her unto a strange nation, he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully
with her. And if he hath betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the
manner of daughters. If he take him another wife, her food, her raiment, and her duty
of marriage, shall he not diminish. And if he do not these three unto her, then shall
she go out free without money.
He that smiteth a man so that he die shall be surely put to death. And if a man lie not
in wait, but God deliver him into his hand, then I will appoint thee a place whither he
shall flee. But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor to slay him with guile,
thou shalt take him from mine altar that he may die. And he that smiteth his father or
his mother shall be surely put to death. And he that stealeth a man and selleth him,
or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death. And he that curseth his father
or his mother shall surely be put to death. And if men strive together and one smite another
with a stone or with his fist, and he die not but keepeth his bed, if he rise again
and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit, only he shall pay
for the loss of his time and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed. And if a man smite
his servant or his maid with a rod, and he die under his hand, he shall be surely punished.
Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his money.
If men strive and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet
no mischief follow, he shall be surely punished according as the woman's husband will lay
upon him, and he shall pay as the judges determine. And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt
give life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning
wound for wound, stripe for stripe. And if a man smite the eye of his servant or the
eye of his maid that it perish, he shall let him go free for his eyes' sake. And if he
smite out his manservant's tooth or his maid's servant's tooth, he shall let him go free
for his tooth's sake. If an ox gore a man or a woman that they die, then the ox shall
be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten, but the owner of the ox shall be
quit. But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified
to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman,
the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death. If there be laid on
him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life whatsoever as laid
upon him. Whether he have gored a son or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment
shall it be done unto him. If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant, he shall
give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned. And if
a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit and not cover it, and an ox or an
ass fall therein, the owner of the pit shall make it good and give money unto the owner
of them, and the dead beast shall be his. And if one man's ox hurt another's that he
die, then they shall sell the live ox and divide the money of it, and the dead ox also
they shall divide. Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and
his owner hath not kept him in, he shall surely pay ox for ox, and the dead shall be his
own.
If a man shall steal an ox or a sheep, and kill it or sell it, he shall restore five
oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten
that he die, there shall no blood be shed for him. If the sun be risen upon him, there
shall be blood shed for him, for he should make full restitution. If he have nothing,
then he shall be sold for his theft. If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive,
whether it be ox or ass or sheep, he shall restore double. If a man shall cause a field
or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's
field, of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make
restitution.
If fire break out and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn or the standing corn
or the field be consumed therewith, he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out
of the man's house, if the thief be found let him pay double. If the thief be not found,
then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put
his hand unto his neighbour's goods. For all manner of trespass, whether it be for
ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, which another challenges
to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges, and whom the judges
shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour. If a man deliver unto his neighbour
an ass or an ox or a sheep or any beast to keep, and it die or be hurt or driven away,
no man seeing it, then shall an oath of the Lord be between them both, that he hath not
put his hand unto his neighbour's goods, and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and
he shall not make it good. And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the
owner thereof. If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and he shall
not make good that which was torn. And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it
be hurt or die, the owner thereof, being not with it, he shall surely make it good. But
if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good. If it be an hired thing,
it came for his hire. And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with
her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife. If her father utterly refused to give her
unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.
Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live. Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to
death. He that sacrificeth unto any god save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed.
Thou shalt neither vex a stranger nor oppress him, for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt. He shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child. If thou afflict them in any wise, and
they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and
I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows and your children fatherless.
If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him
as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury. If thou at all take thy neighbor's
raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down, for that is
his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin, wherein shall he sleep, and it shall
come to pass when he crieth unto me that I will hear, for I am gracious.
Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people. Thou shalt not delay
to offer the first of thy ripe fruits and of thy liquors, the first born of thy sons
shalt thou give unto me. Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen and with thy sheep, seven
days it shall be with his dam, on the eighth day thou shalt give it me. And ye shall be
holy men unto me, neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field,
ye shall cast it to the dogs.
Thou shalt not raise a false report, put not thine hand with a wicked to be an unrighteous
witness.
Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline
after many to rest judgment, neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.
If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back
to him again.
If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear
to help him, thou shalt surely help with him.
Thou shalt not rest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.
Keep thee far from a false matter, and the innocent and righteous slay thou not, for
I will not justify the wicked.
And thou shalt take no gift, for the gift blindeth the wise and perverteth the words
of the righteous.
Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger seeing ye
were strangers in the land of Egypt.
In six years thou shalt sow thy land and shalt gather in the fruits thereof, but the seventh
year thou shalt let it rest and lie still, that the poor of thy people may eat, and what
they leave the beasts of the field shall eat.
In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard and with thy olive-yard.
Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest, that thine ox
and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid and the stranger may be refreshed.
And in all things that I have said unto you, be circumspect, and make no mention of the
name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.
Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread, thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days
as I commanded thee in the time appointed of the month Abib, for in it thou camest out
from Egypt, and none shall appear before me empty.
And the feast of harvest, the first fruits of thy labors, which thou hast sown in the
year, when thou hast gathered in thy labors out of the field, three times in the year
all thy males shall appear before the Lord God.
Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread, neither shall the fat
of my sacrifice remain until the morning.
The first of the first fruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the Lord
thy God.
Thou shalt not see the kid in his mother's milk.
Behold, I send an angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the
place which I have prepared.
Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions,
for my name is in him.
But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy
unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.
For mine angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites,
and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, and I will
cut them off.
Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works, but
thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images.
And ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread and thy water, and
I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.
There shall nothing cast their young nor be barren in thy land the number of thy days
I will fulfill.
I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt
come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.
And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite,
and the Hittite from before thee.
I will not drive them out from before thee in one year, lest the land become desolate,
and the beasts of the field multiply against thee.
By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased
and inherit the land.
And I will set thy bounds from the Red Sea, even unto the Sea of the Philistines, and
from the desert unto the river.
For I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand, and thou shalt drive
them out before thee.
Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me, for if thou serve
their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee.
And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the
Lord, thou and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and Seventy, of the elders of Israel, and worship
ye far off.
And Moses alone shall come near the Lord, but they shall not come nigh, neither shall
the people go up with him.
And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and all the judgments,
and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the Lord hath
said, will we do.
And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose up early in the morning, and build
it an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed
peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord.
And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basins, and half of the blood he sprinkled
on the altar.
And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people, and they
said, All that the Lord hath said, will we do, and be obedient.
And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood
of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words.
Then went up Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and they
saw the God of Israel, and there was under his feet, as it were, a paved work of a sapphire
stone, and as it were, the body of heaven in his clearness.
And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand, also they saw God, and
did eat and drink.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there, and I will
give thee tables of stone, and a law and commandments which I have written, that thou mayest teach
them.
And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua, and Moses went up into the mount of God.
And he said unto the elders, Terry ye here for us, until we come again unto you, and
behold Aaron and her are with you, if any man have any matters to do, let him come unto
them.
And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.
And the glory of the Lord abode upon Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days,
and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
And the sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mount
in the eyes of the children of Israel.
And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and got him up into the mount, and Moses was
in the mount forty days and forty nights.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak
unto the children of Israel that they bring me an offering, of every man that giveth it
willingly with his heart he shall take my offering.
And this is the offering which he shall take of them, gold and silver and brass, and blue
and purple and scarlet and fine linen and goat's hair and ram's skins dyed red and badger's
skins and shittim wood, oil for the light, spices for anointing oil and for sweet incense,
onyx stones and stones to be set in the ephod and in the breastplate, and let them make
me a sanctuary that I may dwell among them.
According to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern
of all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it.
And they shall make an ark of shittim wood, two cubits and a half shall be the length
thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height
thereof.
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it,
and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about.
And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four corners thereof,
and two rings shall be in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it.
And thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark that the ark may be
borne with them.
The staves shall be in the rings of the ark, they shall not be taken from it.
And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.
And thou shalt make a mercy-seat of pure gold, two cubits and a half shall be the length
thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
And thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work, shalt thou make them in the
two ends of the mercy-seat.
And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end, even of the
mercy-seat shall ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy-seat with
their wings, and their faces shall look one to another, toward the mercy-seat shall the
faces of the cherubims be.
And thou shalt put the mercy-seat above upon the ark, and in the ark thou shalt put the
testimony that I shall give thee.
And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy-seat,
from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony of all things which
I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.
Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood, two cubits shall be the length thereof, and
a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.
And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand-breadth round about, and thou shalt make
a golden crown to the border thereof round about.
And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that
are on the four feet thereof.
Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves to bear the table.
And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold that the
table may be borne with them.
And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls
thereof, to cover with all, of pure gold shalt thou make them.
And thou shalt set upon the table showbread before me all way.
And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold, of beaten work shall the candlestick
be made, his shaft and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers shall be of the
same.
And six branches shall come out of the sides of it, three branches of the candlestick out
of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side.
Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch, and three
bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower.
So in the six branches that come out of the candlestick.
And in the candlestick shall be four bowls made like unto almonds, with their knops and
their flowers.
And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches
of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches
that proceed out of the candlestick.
Their knops and their branches shall be of the same.
All it shall be one beaten work of pure gold.
And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof, and they shall light the lamps thereof, that
they may give light over against it.
And the tongs thereof, and the snuff-dishes thereof, shall be of pure gold.
Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it with all these vessels.
And look that thou maketh them after their pattern which was shewed thee in the mount.
Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue
and purple and scarlet, with cherubims of cunning work shalt thou make them.
The length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain
four cubits, and every one of the curtains shall have one measure.
The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another, and other five curtains shall
be coupled one to another.
And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge
in the coupling, and likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of another curtain in
the coupling of the second.
Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge
of the curtain that is in the coupling of the second, that the loops may take hold one
of another.
And thou shalt make fifty tashes of gold, and couple the curtains together with the
tashes, and it shall be one tabernacle.
And thou shalt make curtains of goat's hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle, eleven
curtains shalt thou make.
The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four
cubits, and the eleven curtains shall be all of one measure.
And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt
double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the
coupling, and fifty loops on the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
And thou shalt make fifty tashes of brass, and put the tashes into the loops, and couple
the tent together, that it may be one.
And the remnant of that remaineth that the curtains of the tent, the half-curtain that
remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle.
And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side, of that which remaineth in
the length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle,
on this side, and on that side, to cover it.
And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of ram-skins dyed red, and a covering above
of badger's skins.
And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up.
Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall be the breadth
of one board.
Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against another, thus shalt thou
make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle twenty boards on the south side southward.
And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards, two sockets under
one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, there shall be twenty boards.
And there are forty sockets of silver, two sockets under one board, and two sockets under
another board.
And for the sides of the tabernacle westward, thou shalt make six boards.
And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle and the two sides.
And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the
head of it onto one ring, thus shall it be for them both, they shall be for the two corners.
And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver sixteen sockets, two sockets
under one board, and two sockets under another board.
And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood, five for the boards of the one side of the
tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle for the two sides
westward.
And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end.
And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for
the bars, and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold.
And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion thereof which was shewed thee
in the mount.
And thou shalt make a veil of blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen of cunning
work with cherubims shall it be made.
And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold, their hooks
shall be of gold upon the four sockets of silver.
And thou shalt hang up the veil under the tashes that thou mayest bring in thither within
the veil the ark of the testimony, and the veil shall divide unto you between the holy
place and the most holy.
And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.
And thou shalt set the table without the veil and the candlestick over against the table
on the side of the tabernacle toward the south.
And thou shalt put the table on the north side.
And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent of blue and purple and scarlet
and fine twined linen wrought with needlework.
And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold,
and their hooks shall be of gold.
And thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.
And thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long and five cubits broad.
The altar shall be four square, and the height thereof shall be three cubits.
And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof.
His horns shall be of the same, and thou shalt overlay it with brass.
And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basins, and
his flesh-hooks, and his fire-pans, all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.
And thou shalt make for it a great of network of brass, and upon the net shalt thou make
four brazen rings, in the four corners thereof.
And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath, that the net may be even
to the midst of the altar.
And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with
brass.
And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides
of the altar, to bear it.
Hollow with boards shalt thou make it.
As it was shewed thee in the mount, so shall they make it.
And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle, for the south side southward there shall be
hangings for the court of fine twine linen of an hundred cubits long for one side, and
the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass, the hooks of the
pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.
And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings of an hundred cubits
long, and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets of brass, the hooks of the pillars
and their fillets of silver.
And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits, their
pillars ten and their sockets ten.
And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.
The hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits, their pillars three and
their sockets three.
And on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits, their pillars three and their sockets
three.
And for the gate of the court shall be in hanging of twenty cubits of blue and purple
and scarlet and fine twine linen wrought with needlework, and their pillars shall be four
and their sockets four.
All the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with silver, their hooks shall
be of silver and their sockets of brass.
The length of the court shall be in hundred cubits and the breadth fifty everywhere and
the height five cubits of fine twine linen and their sockets of brass.
All the vessels of the tabernacle and all the service thereof and all the pins thereof
and all the pins of the court shall be of brass.
And thou shalt command the children of Israel that they bring the pure oil olive beaten
for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always.
In the tabernacle of the congregation, without the veil which is before the testimony, Aaron
and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the Lord.
It shall be a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children
of Israel.
And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children
of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab, and
Abihu, Eliezer, and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.
And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for glory, and for beauty.
And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise-hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom
that they may make Aaron's garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's
office.
And these are the garments which they shall make, a breast-plate, and an ephod, and a
robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle.
And they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister
unto me in the priest's office.
And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen.
And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and fine-twined
linen, with cunning work.
It shall have the two shoulder-pieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof, and so it
shall be joined together.
And the curious girdle of the ephod which is upon it shall be of the same according
to the work thereof, even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine-twined linen.
And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and engrave on them the names of the children of Israel,
six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone according
to their birth.
With the work of an engraver and stone, like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave
the two stones with the names of the children of Israel, thou shalt make them to be set
in ushahs of gold.
And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod for stones of memorial
unto the children of Israel, and Aaron shall bear their names before the Lord upon his
two shoulders for a memorial.
And thou shalt make ushahs of gold and two chains of pure gold at the ends, of wreath
and work, shalt thou make them and fasten the wreath and chains to the ushahs.
And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work, after the work of the ephod
thou shalt make it, of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine-twined
linen shalt thou make it.
Four square it shall be being doubled, a span shall be the length thereof, and a span shall
be the breadth thereof.
And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones, the first row shall
be a sardius, a topaz, and a carvokal, this shall be the first row, and the second row
shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond, and the third row a ligure, an agate, and
an amethyst, and the fourth row a burl, and an onyx, and a jasper, they shall be set in
their enclosings.
And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according
to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name shall they be according
to the twelve tribes.
And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of wreath and work of pure gold.
And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings
on the two ends of the breastplate.
And thou shalt put the two wreath and chains of gold in the two rings which are on the
ends of the breastplate.
And the other two ends of the two wreath and chains thou shalt fasten in the two ooshes,
and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod before it.
And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the
breastplate in the border thereof, which is in the side of the ephod inward.
And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the
ephod underneath, toward the fore-part thereof, over against the other coupling thereof, above
the curius girdle of the ephod.
And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof, unto the rings of the ephod,
with a lace of blue, that it may be above the curius girdle of the ephod, and that the
breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel, and the breastplate of judgment,
upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord
continually.
And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim, and they shall be
upon Aaron's heart, when he goeth in before the Lord, and Aaron shall bear the judgment
of the children of Israel, upon his heart, before the Lord continually.
And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue, and there shall be a hole in
the top of it, in the midst thereof, it shall have a binding of woven work round about the
hole of it, as it were the hole of an hebergen, that it be not rent.
And beneath upon the hem of it, thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple,
and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof, and bells of gold between them round about,
a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the
robe round about.
And it shall be upon Aaron to minister, and his sound shall be heard, when he goeth in
unto the holy place before the Lord, and when he cometh out, that he die not.
And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like the engravings of
a signet, holiness to the Lord.
And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre, upon the forefront
of the mitre it shall be.
And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things
which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts.
And it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the Lord.
And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre of fine
linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of needlework.
And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and
bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for beauty.
And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, and shalt anoint them,
and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's
office.
And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their nakedness, for in the loins even
unto the thighs they shall reach.
And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle
of the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place,
that they bear not iniquity and die.
It shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after him.
And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them to minister unto me in
the priest's office.
Take one young bullock and two rams without blemish, and unleavened bread and cakes unleavened,
tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil, of wheat and flour shalt thou make
them.
And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket with the bullock
and the two rams.
And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
and shalt wash them with water.
And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat and the robe of the ephod
and the ephod and the breastplate, and guard him with the curious girdle of the ephod.
And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.
Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.
And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.
And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and put the bonnets on them.
And the priest's office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute.
And thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons.
And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation,
and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.
And thou shalt kill the bullock before the Lord by the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.
And thou shalt take the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with
thy finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.
And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth thee inwards, and the caul that is above the
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.
But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without
the camp.
It is a sin offering.
Thou shalt also take one ram, and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head
of the ram.
And thou shalt slay the ram, and shalt take his blood, and sprinkle it round about upon
the altar.
And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and
put them under his pieces, and unto his head.
And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar.
It is a burnt offering unto the Lord.
It is a sweet savor, an offering made by fire, unto the Lord.
And thou shalt take the other ram, and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the
head of the ram.
Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it upon the tip of the
right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb
of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood
upon the altar round about.
And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle
Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with
him.
And he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with
Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat, and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards,
and the call above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and
the right shoulder, for it is a ram of consecration.
And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of
the unleavened bread that is before the Lord.
And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons, and shalt waive
them for a wave offering before the Lord.
And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt offering,
for a sweet savor before the Lord.
It is an offering made by fire under the Lord.
And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron's consecration, and waive it for
a wave offering before the Lord, and it shall be thy part.
And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the shoulder of the heave
offering, which is waived, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, even of
that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons.
And it shall be Aaron's and his sons by a statute forever from the children of Israel,
for it is an heave offering, and it shall be an heave offering from the children of
Israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave offering, unto the Lord.
And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons after him, to be anointed therein, and
to be consecrated in them.
And that son that is priest in his stead shall put them all in seven days, when he cometh
into the tabernacle of the congregation, to minister in the holy place.
And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seeth his flesh in the holy place.
And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket,
by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate and
to sanctify them.
But a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy.
And if aught of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning,
then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire.
It shall not be eaten, because it is holy.
And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all things which I
have commanded thee, seven days shalt thou consecrate them.
And thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering, for atonement.
And thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it.
And thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.
Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it.
And it shall be an altar most holy.
Whatsoever toucheth the altar, shall be holy.
Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar, two lambs of the first year, day
by day, continually.
The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning, and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even.
And with the one lamb a tenth theel of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hen of
beaten oil, and the fourth part of an hen of wine for a drink offering.
And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to the meat
offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour,
an offering made by fire unto the Lord.
This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation before the Lord, where I will meet you to speak there unto thee.
And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified
by my glory.
And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar.
I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest's office.
And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God.
And they shall know that I am the Lord their God, that brought them forth out of the land
of Egypt, that I may dwell among them.
I am the Lord their God.
And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon.
Of shittim wood shalt thou make it.
A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof.
Four square shall it be, and two cubits shall be the height thereof, the horns thereof shall
be of the same.
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round
about, and the horns thereof.
And thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.
And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by the two corners
thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it.
And they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.
And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
And thou shalt put it before the veil that is by the ark of the testimony, before the
mercy-seat that is over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.
And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning.
When he dresseth the lamps he shall burn incense upon it.
And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual
incense before the Lord throughout your generations.
He shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering, neither
shall ye pour drink offering thereon.
And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood
of the sin-offering of atonements.
Once in the year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations.
It is most holy unto the Lord.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel
after their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord when
thou numberest them, that there be no plague among them when thou numberest them.
This they shall give every one that passeth among them that are numbered half a shekel
after the shekel of the sanctuary, a shekel is twenty girahs, and half shekel shall be
the offering of the Lord.
Every one that passeth among them that are numbered from twenty years old and above shall
give an offering unto the Lord.
The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel when
they give an offering unto the Lord to make an atonement for your souls.
And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint
it for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation, that it may be a memorial unto
the children of Israel before the Lord to make an atonement for your souls.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Thou shalt also make a laver of brass and his foot
also of brass to wash withal, and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation
and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein.
For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat.
When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation they shall wash with water that they die not,
or when they come near to the altar to minister to burn offering made by fire unto the Lord.
So they shall wash their hands and their feet that they die not, and it shall be a statute
for ever to them, even to him and to his seed, throughout their generations.
Moreover the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Take thou also unto the principal spices of
pure myrrh 500 shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even 250 shekels, and of sweet
calamus 250 shekels, and of castia 500 shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of
oil olive and hyn, and thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment and ointment compound
after the ark of the apothecary, it shall be in holy anointing oil, and thou shalt anoint
the tabernacle of the congregation therewith, and the ark of the testimony, and the table
and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of incense, and
the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and his foot, and thou shalt
sanctify them that they may be most holy, whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy, and
thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them that they may minister unto
me in the priest's office, and thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying,
This shall be in holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.
Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it after the
composition of it, it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you. Whosoever compoundeth any
like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his
people.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Take unto these sweet spices Stacti and Onica and Galbanum,
these sweet spices with pure frankincense, of each shall there be a like weight, and
thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection, after the art of the apothecary, tempered
together, pure and holy, and thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before
the testimony and the tabernacle of the congregation, where I will meet with thee, it shall be unto
you most holy.
And as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to yourselves according
unto the composition thereof, it shall be unto thee holy for the Lord. Whosoever shall
make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, See, I have called by name Bezalel the son of Uri,
the son of Her of the tribe of Judah, and I have filled him with the Spirit of God,
and in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
to devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in cutting
of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.
And I, behold, I have given with him a Holy Ab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of
Dan, and in the hearts of all that are wise-hearted I have put wisdom that they may make all that
I have commanded thee. The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony,
and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle, and the
table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,
and the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot, and
the cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of
his sons to minister in the priest's office, and the anointing oil and sweet incense for
the holy place, according to all that I have commanded thee, shall they do.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying,
Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign between me and you throughout your
generations that ye may know that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you. He shall keep
the Sabbath therefore, for it is holy unto you. Every one that defile it shall surely
be put to death, for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among
his people. Six days may work be done, but in the seventh is the Sabbath of rest, holy
to the Lord. Whosoever doeth any work in the Sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.
Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath to observe the Sabbath throughout
their generations for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of
Israel forever, for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
rested and was refreshed. And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing
with him upon Mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.
And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the
mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said
unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us. For as for this
Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we want
not what has become of him. And Aaron said unto them, Break off the
golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons,
and of your daughters, and bring them unto me. And all the people
broke off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought
them unto Aaron. And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it
with a graving-tool, after he had made it a molten calf. And they
said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt. And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it, and
Aaron made proclamation, and said, Tomorrow is a feast to the Lord.
And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and
brought peace offerings. And the people sat down to eat and to drink,
and rose up to play.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down, for thy people which
thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted themselves.
They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them.
They have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have
sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and behold, it
is a stiff-necked people. Now, therefore, let me alone that my wrath
may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them, and I will make
of thee a great nation.
And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why doth thy wrath
wax hot against thy people which thou hast brought forth out of the
land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand? Wherefore
should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them
out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face
of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil
against thy people. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants,
to whom thou swearst by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will
multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I
have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it
for ever.
And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his
people.
Then Moses turned and went down from the mount, and the two tables of
the testimony were in his hand. The tables were written on both their
sides, on the one side and on the other were they written. And the
tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God,
graven upon the tables. And when Joshua heard the noise of the people
as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the
camp. And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for
mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome,
but the noise of them that sing do I hear.
And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he
saw the calf and the dancing, and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast
the tables out of his hands and break them beneath the mount. And he
took the calf which they had made and burnt it in the fire and ground
it to powder and strawed it upon the water and made the children of
Israel drink of it.
And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee that thou
hast brought so great a sin upon them? And Aaron said, Let not the
anger of my Lord wax hot. Thou knowest the people that they are set
on mischief. For they said unto me, Make us gods which shall go
before us, for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of
the land of Egypt, we want not what has become of him. And I said
unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it off. So they
gave it me. Then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this
calf.
And when Moses saw that the people were naked, for Aaron had made
them naked unto their shame among their enemies, then Moses stood in
the cate of the camp and said, Who is on the Lord's side? Let him come
unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto
him. And he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbor.
And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses, and
there fell of the people that day about three thousand men. For Moses
had said, Consecrate yourselves today to the Lord even every man
upon his son and upon his brother, that he may bestow upon you a
blessing this day.
And it came to pass on the morrow that Moses said unto the people, Ye
have sinned a great sin, and now I will go up unto the Lord. Per
adventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.
And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, O this people have sinned
a great sin, and have made them gods of gold. Yet now if thou wilt
forgive their sin, and if not blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book
which thou hast written.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me, him
will I blot out of my book. Therefore now go, lead the people unto
the place of which I have spoken unto thee. Behold, mine angel shall
go before thee. Nevertheless, in the day when I visit, I will visit
their sin upon them.
And the Lord plagued the people, because they made the calf which
Aaron made.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the
people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the
land which I swear unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, unto
thy seed will I give it. And I will send an angel before thee, and I
will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the
Perizzite, the Hibite, and the Jebusite, unto a land flowing with milk
and honey. For I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a
stiff-necked people, lest I consume thee in the way.
And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned, and no man
did put on him his ornaments. For the Lord had said unto Moses, Say unto
the children of Israel, Ye are a stiff-necked people, I will come up
into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee. Therefore now put
off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.
And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by
the Mount Horeb. And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without
the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it the tabernacle of the
congregation. And it came to pass that every one which sought the Lord
went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the
camp. And it came to pass when Moses went out unto the tabernacle that
all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent-door, and looked
after Moses until he was gone into the tabernacle. And it came to pass
as Moses entered into the tabernacle the cloudy pillar descended and
stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with Moses. And
all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door, and
all the people rose up and worshipped every man in his tent-door. And the
Lord spake unto Moses face to face as a man speaketh unto his friend.
And he turned again into the camp, but his servant Joshua, the son of
John, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle.
And Moses said unto the Lord, See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this
people, and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Yet
thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in
my sight. Now therefore I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight,
show me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in
thy sight, and consider that this nation is thy people. And he said,
My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest. And he said
unto him, If thy presence go not with me, carryest not a pence. For
wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace
in thy sight? Is it not in that thou goest with us? So shall we be
separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face
of the earth. And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do this thing also
that thou hast spoken, for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I
know thee by name. And he said, I beseech thee, show me thy glory. And
he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will
proclaim the name of the Lord before thee, and will be gracious to whom
I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy.
And he said, thou canst not see my face, for there shall no man see me
and live. And the Lord said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou
shalt stand upon a rock, and it shall come to pass, while my glory
passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover
thee with my hand while I pass by, and I will take away mine hand, and
thou shalt see my back parts, but my face shall not be seen.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two
tables of stone like unto the first, and I will write upon these
tables the words that were in the first tables which thou breakest. And
be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto Mount Sinai,
and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount. And no man
shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all
the mount, neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.
And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and Moses rose
up early in the morning, and went up unto Mount Sinai as the Lord had
commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone. And the
Lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed
the name of the Lord. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed,
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the
guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and
the children's children unto the third and to the fourth generation.
And Moses made haste and bowed his head toward the earth and worshipped,
and he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my
Lord, I pray thee, go among us, for it is a stiff-necked people, and
pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.
And he said, Behold, I make a covenant, before all thy people I will do
marvels such as have not been done in all the earth nor in any nation,
and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the Lord,
for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee. Observe thou that
which I command thee this day, behold, I drive out before thee the
the Samarite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite,
and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants
of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of
thee. But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut
down their groves, for thou shalt worship no other God, for the Lord
whose name is Jealous is a Jealous God, lest thou make a covenant with
the inhabitants of the land, and they go a-whoring after their gods,
and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat his
sacrifice, and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their
daughters go a-whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a-whoring
after their gods. Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.
The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat
unleavened bread, as I commanded thee in the time of the month Abib,
for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt. All that openeth the
matrix is mine, and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or
sheep, that is male. But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with
a lamb, and if thou redeem him not, then thou shalt break his neck. All
the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem, and none shall appear
before me empty. Six days thou shalt labor, but on the seventh day
thou shalt rest, in earring-time and in harvest thou shalt rest. And
thou shalt observe the feast of weeks of the firstfruits of wheat
harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end. Thrice in the
year shall all your men-children appear before the Lord God, the God
of Israel. For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge
thy borders. Neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go
up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the year. Thou shalt not
offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven. Neither shall the sacrifice
of the feast of the Passover be left unto the morning. The first of the
firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the Lord thy
God. Thou shalt not see the kid in his mother's milk.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words, for after the
tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.
And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights. He did
neither eat bread nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the
words of the covenant the Ten Commandments. And it came to pass when
Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in
Moses's hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses whist not
that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him. And when
Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of
his face shone, and they were afraid to come nigh him. And Moses
called unto them, and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation
returned unto him, and Moses talked with them. And afterward all the
children of Israel came nigh, and he gave them in commandment all that
the Lord had spoken with him in Mount Sinai. Until Moses had done
speaking with them, he put a veil on his face. But when Moses went in
for the Lord to speak with him, he took the veil off until he came
out. And he came out and spake unto the children of Israel that which
he was commanded. And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses
that the skin of Moses's face shone. And Moses put the veil upon his
face again until he went in to speak with him.
And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel
together, and said unto them, These are the words which the Lord hath
commanded that ye should do them. Six days shall work be done, but on
the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day, a Sabbath of rest
to the Lord. Whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death. Ye
shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath day.
And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel,
saying, This is the thing which the Lord commanded, saying, Take ye from
among you an offering unto the Lord. Whosoever is of a willing heart,
let him bring it, an offering of the Lord. Gold and silver and brass
and blue and purple and scarlet and fine linen and goat's hair and
ram's skins dyed red and badger's skins and shittim wood and oil for
light and spices for anointing oil and for the sweet incense and onyx
stones and stones to be set for the ephod and for the breastplate. And
every wise heart that among you shall come and make all that the Lord
hath commanded, the tabernacle, his tent and his covering, his tashes
and his boards, his bars, his pillars and his sockets, the ark and the
staves thereof with the mercy seat and the veil of the covering, the
table and his staves and all his vessels and the showbread, the
candlestick also for the light and his furniture and his lamps with
the oil for the light, and the incense altar and his staves and the
anointing oil and the sweet incense and the hanging for the door at the
entering inn of the tabernacle, the altar of burnt offering with his
and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, the hangings for the
court, his pillars and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of
the court, the pins of the tabernacle and the pins of the court and
their cords, the cloths of service to do service in the holy place, the
holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments of his sons to
minister in the priest's office.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the
presence of Moses. And they came, every one whose heart stirred him
up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the
Lord's offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation and
for all his service and for the holy garments. And they came, both men
and women, as many as were willing-hearted, and brought bracelets and
earrings and rings and tablets, all jewels of gold, and every man that
offered offered an offering of gold unto the Lord. And every man with
whom was found blue and purple and scarlet and fine linen and goats'
hair and red skins of rams and badger's skins brought them. Everyone
that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the Lord's
offering, and every man with whom was found shittim wood for any work
of the service brought it. And all the women that were wise-hearted
did spin with their hands and brought that which they had spun, both
of blue and of purple and of scarlet and of fine linen. And all the
women whose hearts stirred them up in wisdom spun goats' hair. And the
rulers brought onyx stones and stones to be set for the ephod and for
the breastplate, and spice and oil for the light and for the anointing
oil, and for the sweet incense. The children of Israel brought a
willing offering unto the Lord, every man and woman whose heart made
them willing to bring for all manner of work which the Lord had
commanded to be made by the hand of Moses.
And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the Lord hath called
by name Bezalel the son of Uriah the son of Her of the tribe of Judah,
and he hath filled him with the Spirit of God in wisdom, in understanding
and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, and to devise
curious works, to work in gold and in silver and in brass, and in the
cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood, to make any
manner of cunning work. And he hath put in his heart that he may teach
both he and Aholiab the son of Hisamach of the tribe of Dan. Them hath
he filled with wisdom of heart to work all manner of work, of the
engraver and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, and blue
and in purple, and in scarlet and in fine linen, and of the weaver,
even of them that do any work, and of those that devise cunning work.
The Lord hath called by name Bezalel the son of Her of the tribe of Judah,
Then wrought Bezalel and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whom the Lord put wisdom
and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary,
according to all that the Lord had commanded.
And Moses called Bezalel and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whose heart the
Lord had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work
to do it.
And they received of Moses all the offering which the children of Israel had brought for
the work of the service of the sanctuary to make it withal.
And they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.
And all the wise men that wrought all the work of the sanctuary came every man from
his work which they made.
And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service
of the work which the Lord commanded to make.
And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the cap, saying,
Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary.
So the people were restrained from bringing, for the stuff they had was sufficient for
all the work to make it, and too much.
And every wise-hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten
curtains of fine twine linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubims of cunning
work made he them.
The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four
The curtains were all of one size.
And he coupled the five curtains one unto another, and the other five curtains he coupled
one unto another.
And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling,
likewise he made in the uttermost side of another curtain in the coupling of the second.
Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain which
was in the coupling of the second, the loops held one curtain to another.
And he made fifty tashes of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the tashes,
so it became one tabernacle.
And he made curtains of goat's hair for the tent over the tabernacle, eleven curtains
he made them.
The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one curtain,
the eleven curtains were of one size.
And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.
And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty
loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
And he made fifty tashes of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
And he made a covering for the tent of ram's skins dyed red, and a covering of badger's
skins above that.
And he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up.
The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.
One board had two tenons equally distant one from another, thus did he make for all the
boards of the tabernacle.
And he made boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards for the south side southward, and forty
sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards, two sockets under one board for his
two tenons and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
And for the other side of the tabernacle which is toward the north corner, he made twenty
boards, and their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under one board and two sockets
under another board.
And for the sides of the tabernacle westward, he made six boards.
and two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides, and they
were coupled beneath and coupled together at the head thereof to one ring, thus he did
to both of them in both the corners. And there were eight boards, and their sockets were
sixteen sockets of silver under every board two sockets. And he made bars of shittim wood,
five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of
the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for
the sides westward. And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one
end to the other. And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold to
be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold. And he made a veil of blue and
purple and scarlet and fine twined linen, with cherubims made he it of cunning work.
And he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold, their hooks
were of gold, and he cast for them four sockets of silver. And he made an hanging for the
tabernacle door of blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen of needlework, and the
five pillars of it with their hooks, and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets
with gold, but their five sockets were of brass.
And Bezalil made the ark of shittim wood. Two cubits and a half was the length
of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of
it. And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it
round about. And he cast for it four rings of gold to be set by the four corners of it,
even two rings upon the one side of it and two rings upon the other side of it. And he
made staves of shittim wood and overlaid them with gold, and he put the staves into the
rings by the sides of the ark to bear the ark. And he made the mercy seat of pure gold,
two cubits and a half was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two
ends of the mercy seat, one cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the
other end on that side, how to the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
And the cherubims spread out their wings on high and covered with their wings over the
mercy seat with their faces one to another, even to the mercy seatward were the faces
of the cherubims. And he made the table of shittim wood, two cubits was the length thereof,
and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof. And he overlaid
it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about. Also he made thereunto
a border of an hand breadth round about, and made a crown of gold for the border thereof
round about. And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners
that were in the four feet thereof. Over against the border were the rings, the places
for the staves to bear the table. And he made the staves of shittim wood and overlaid them
with gold to bear the table. And he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes
and his spoons and his bowls and his covers to cover with all, of pure gold. And he made
the candlestick of pure gold, of beaten work made he the candlestick, his shaft and his
branch, his bowls, his knops and his flowers, were of the same. And six branches going out
of the sides thereof, three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and
three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof. Three bowls made after
the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower. And three bowls made like almonds
in another branch, a knop and a flower. So throughout the six branches going out of the
candlestick. And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops and his
flowers. And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of
the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going
out of it. Their knops and their branches were of the same. All of it was one beaten
work of pure gold. And he made his seven lamps and his snuffers and his snuff-dishes of pure
gold. Of a talent of pure gold made he at all the vessels thereof. And he made the incense
altar of shittim wood. The length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit. It
was four square, and two cubits was the height of it. The horns thereof were of the same.
And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it and the sides thereof round about,
and the horns of it. Also he made unto it a crown of gold round about. And he made two
rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides
thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal. And he made the staves of shittim
wood and overlaid them with gold. And he made the holy anointing oil and the pure incense
of sweet spices according to the work of the apothecary.
And he made the altar of burnt offering of
shittim wood. Five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof. It was
four square, and three cubits the height thereof. And he made the horns thereof on the four
corners of it. The horns thereof were of the same. And he overlaid it with brass. And he
made all the vessels of the altar, the pots and the shovels and the basins and the flesh
hooks and the firepans, all the vessels thereof made he of brass. And he made for the altar
a brazen grate of net work under the compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it. And
he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass to be places for the staves.
And he made the staves of shittim wood and overlaid them with brass. And he put the staves
into the rings on the sides of the altar to bear it withal. He made the altar hollow with
boards. And he made the laver of brass and the foot of it of brass of the looking-glasses
of the women assembling which assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And he made the court. On the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twine
linen and a hundred cubits. Their pillars were 20 and their brazen sockets 20. The hooks
of the pillars and their fillets were of silver. And for the north side the hangings were a
hundred cubits. Their pillars were 20 and their sockets of brass 20. The hooks of the
pillars and their fillets of silver. And for the west side were hangings of 50 cubits,
their pillars ten, and their sockets ten, the hooks of the pillars and their fillets
of silver, and for the east side eastward fifty cubits. The hangings of the one side
of the gate were fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three, and for the
other side of the court gate on this hand and on that hand were hangings of fifteen
cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three. All the hangings of the court round
about were of fine twined linen, and the sockets for the pillars were of brass, the hooks of
the pillars and their fillets of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters of silver,
and all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver. And the hanging for the gate
of the court was needlework of blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen, and twenty
cubits was the length, and the height and the breadth was five cubits answerable to
the hangings of the court. And their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four,
their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets of silver.
And all the pins of the tabernacle and of the court round about were of brass.
This is the sum of the tabernacle even of the tabernacle of testimony as it was counted
according to the commandment of Moses for the service of the Levites by the hand of
son to Aaron the priest. And Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Her, of the tribe of Judah,
made all that the Lord commanded Moses. And with him was a holy Ab, son of Ahisamach,
of the tribe of Dan, an engraver and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue and in
purple and in scarlet and fine linen. All the gold that was occupied for the work and
all the work of the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents
and seven hundred and thirty shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary. And the silver
of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents and a thousand seven
hundred and three score and fifteen shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary. A becca
for every man, that is, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one
that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand
and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men. And of the hundred talents of silver
were cast the sockets of the sanctuary and the sockets of the veil, and hundred sockets
of the hundred talents a talent for a socket. And of the thousand seven hundred seventy
and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars and overlaid their chapiters and filleted
them. And the brass of the offering was seventy talents and two thousand and four hundred
shekels. And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation
and the brazen altar and the brazen grate for it and all the vessels of the altar, and
the sockets of the court round about and the sockets of the court-gate and all the pins
of the tabernacle and all the pins of the court round about.
And of the blue and purple and scarlet they
made cloths of service to do service in the holy place and made the holy garments for
Aaron as the Lord commanded Moses. And he made the ephod of gold, blue and purple and
scarlet and fine twined linen. And they did beat the gold into thin plates and cut it
into wires to work it in the blue and in the purple and in the scarlet and in the fine
linen with cunning work. They made shoulder-pieces for it to couple it together, by the two edges
was it coupled together. And the curious girdle of his ephod that was upon it was of the same,
according to the work thereof, of gold, blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen
as the Lord commanded Moses. And they wrought onyx stones enclosed in ooshes of gold graven
as signets are graven with the names of the children of Israel. And he put them on the
shoulders of the ephod that they should be stones for a memorial to the children of Israel
as the Lord commanded Moses. And he made the breast-plate of cunning work like the work
of the ephod of gold, blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen. It was four
square they made the breast-plate double, a span was the length thereof and a span the
length thereof being doubled. And they set in at four rows of stones. The first row was
a sardius, a topaz and a carbuncle. This was the first row. And the second row an emerald,
a sapphire and a diamond. And the third row a ligure, an agate and an amethyst. And the
fourth row a burl, an onyx and a jasper. They were enclosed in ooshes of gold in their enclosings.
And the stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according
to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the
twelve tribes. And they made upon the breast-plate chains at the ends of wreathen work of pure
gold. And they made two ooshes of gold and two gold rings and put the two rings in the
two ends of the breast-plate. And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two
rings on the ends of the breast-plate. And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they
fastened in the two ooshes and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod before it.
And they made two rings of gold and put them on the two ends of the breast-plate upon the
border of it which was on the side of the ephod inward. And they made two other golden
rings and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath toward the fore-part of it
over against the other coupling thereof above the curious girdle of the ephod. And they
did bind the breast-plate by his rings under the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue
that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod and that the breast-plate might
not be loosed from the ephod as the Lord commanded Moses. And he made the robe of the ephod of
woven work all of blue. And there was a hole in the midst of the robe as the hole of an
ephod was a virgin with a band round about the hole that it should not rend. And they
made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue and purple and scarlet and twined
linen. And they made bells of pure gold and put the bells between the pomegranates upon
the hem of the robe round about between the pomegranates, a bell and a pomegranate, a
bell and a pomegranate round about the hem of the robe to minister in as the Lord commanded
Moses. And they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron and for his sons and
a mitre of fine linen and goodly bonnets of fine linen and linen breeches of fine twined
linen and a girdle of fine twined linen and blue and purple and scarlet of needlework
as the Lord commanded Moses. And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold and
wrote upon it a writing like to the engravings of a signet, Holiness to the Lord. And they
tied unto it a lace of blue to fasten it on high upon the mitre as the Lord commanded
Moses. Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished and
the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.
And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent and all his furniture, his tashes,
his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets. And the covering of ram skins
dyed red, and the covering of badger's skins, and the veil of the covering, the ark of the
testimony and the staves thereof and the mercy seat, the table and all the vessels thereof
and the showbread, the pure candlestick with the lamps thereof even with the lamps to be
set in order and all the vessels thereof and the oil for light and the golden altar and
the anointing oil and the sweet incense and the hanging for the tabernacle door, the brazen
altar and his grate of brass, his staves and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, the
hangings of the court, his pillars and his sockets, and the hanging for the court-gate,
his cords and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle for the tent
of the congregation, the cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy
garments for Aaron the priest and his son's garments to minister in the priest's office.
According to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work.
And Moses did look upon all the work, and behold, they had done it as the Lord had commanded.
Even so had they done it, and Moses blessed them.
And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, On the first day of the first month shalt thou
set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and thou shalt put therein the ark of the
testimony and cover the ark with a veil, and thou shalt bring in the table and set in order
the things that are to be set in order upon it, and thou shalt bring in the candlestick
and light the lamps thereof, and thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before
the ark of the testimony and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle, and thou shalt
set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of
the congregation, and thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and
the altar and shalt put water therein, and thou shalt set up the court round about and
hang up the hanging at the court gate, and thou shalt take the anointing oil and anoint
the tabernacle and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it and all the vessels thereof,
and it shall be holy, and thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering and all his
vessels and sanctify the altar, and it shall be an altar most holy, and thou shalt anoint
the laver and his foot and sanctify it, and thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation and wash them with water, and thou shalt put
upon Aaron the holy garments and anoint him and sanctify him that he may minister unto
me in the priest's office, and thou shalt bring his sons and clothe them with coats,
and thou shalt anoint them as thou didst anoint their father that they may minister unto me
in the priest's office, for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood
throughout their generations. Thus did Moses, according to all that the Lord commanded him,
so did he.
And it came to pass in the first month and the second year on the first day of the month
that the tabernacle was reared up, and Moses reared up the tabernacle and fastened his
sockets and set up the boards thereof and put in the bars thereof and reared up his
pillars, and he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle and put the covering of the
tent above upon it as the Lord commanded Moses, and he took and put the testimony into
the ark and set the staves on the ark and put the mercy seat above upon the ark, and
he brought the ark into the tabernacle and set up the veil of the covering and covered
the ark of the testimony as the Lord commanded Moses, and he put the table in the tent of
the congregation upon the side of the tabernacle northward without the veil, and he set the
bed in order upon it before the Lord as the Lord had commanded Moses, and he put the candlestick
in the tent of the congregation over against the table on the side of the tabernacle southward,
and he lighted the lamps before the Lord as the Lord commanded Moses, and he put the golden
altar in the tent of the congregation before the veil, and he burnt sweet incense thereon
commanded Moses, and he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle, and he put
the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation
and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering as the Lord commanded Moses,
and he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar and put water there
to wash withal, and Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat
when they went into the tent of the congregation and when they came near under the altar they
washed as the Lord commanded Moses, and he reared up the court round about the tabernacle
and the altar and set up the hanging of the court gate, so Moses finished the work. Then
a cloud covered the tent of the congregation and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle,
and Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation because the cloud abode
thereon and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle, and when the cloud was taken
up from over the tabernacle the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys,
but if the cloud were not taken up then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken
up, for the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day and fire was on it by night
in the sight of all the house of Israel throughout all their journeys.